Translator
==========

The translator turns the abstract syntax tree into a sequence of Hex
instructions. In ``src/xcmp.hpp`` this is not a single pass but a short
sequence of tree visitors that prepare the tree, followed by the ``CodeGen``
visitor that emits intermediate directives into a ``CodeBuffer``, and two
lowering passes that turn those directives into concrete instructions. This
page covers scope handling, the optimisations, and how statements, expressions
and control flow are generated. The memory map and the calling sequence are
described separately in :doc:`memory-and-calling`, and the individual
instruction sequences in :doc:`codegen-idioms`.

Symbols and scope
-----------------

Names are resolved through a ``SymbolTable``, keyed by a
``(scope, name)`` pair. The scope is either the empty string (global) or the
name of the enclosing procedure; X has only two levels of scope, so a flat map
is sufficient. The ``CreateSymbols`` visitor walks the whole tree first and
inserts a ``Symbol`` for every declaration, formal, procedure and function,
recording its ``SymbolType`` (``VAL``, ``VAR``, ``ARRAY``, ``FUNC``, ``PROC``
or ``CHAN``) and a pointer back to its AST node. ``SymbolTable::lookup`` tries
the current scope first and falls back to the global scope, so a procedure can
refer to globals as well as its own formals and locals.

Tree optimisations
------------------

Two visitors run over the tree before code generation. Both are intentionally
local and simple.

**Constant propagation** (``ConstProp``). This pass annotates every ``Expr``
that can be evaluated at compile time with its constant value. ``NumberExpr``
and ``BooleanExpr`` are constant by definition; a ``VarRefExpr`` or a ``call``
that resolves to a ``val`` declaration takes that declaration's value; and a
``BinaryOpExpr`` or ``UnaryOpExpr`` whose operands are all constant is folded
to a single value. The fold covers ``+``, ``-``, all six relational operators,
``and``, ``or``, unary minus and unary ``~``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../src/xcmp.hpp
   :language: cpp
   :lines: 2153-2196

The same pass also validates and resolves system calls: a numeric callee, or a
``val`` whose value names a syscall, is checked against ``hex::Syscall``.

**Expression normalisation** (``OptimiseExpr``). This pass rewrites the
relational and unary operators so that code generation only has to deal with
``<``, ``=`` and ``~``. The rewrites are:

* ``a ~= b`` becomes ``~(a = b)``
* ``a >= b`` becomes ``~(a < b)``
* ``a > b`` becomes ``b < a``
* ``a <= b`` becomes ``~(b < a)``
* unary ``-x`` becomes ``0 - x``

Each rewrite installs a replacement node via ``setExprReplacement``, which the
parent node then moves into place. There is no general algebraic
simplification, common-subexpression elimination or strength reduction — the
compiler does only what is described here, keeping the object code close to the
source.

Code generation
---------------

``CodeGen`` walks the tree and emits an *intermediate* instruction stream into
a ``CodeBuffer``. Real Hex instructions (``LDAM``, ``LDAC``, ``ADD``, ``BR``,
``OPR`` and so on) are emitted directly through the ``gen…`` helpers, but
frame-relative accesses and the procedure prologue/epilogue are emitted as
*placeholder* directives (``LDAI_FB``/``STAI_FB``, ``PROLOGUE``, ``EPILOGUE``,
``SP_VALUE``) whose concrete form depends on the final frame size, which is not
yet known. These are concrete subclasses of ``hexasm::Directive``
(``IntermediateDirective``, ``InstrStackOffset``, ``Prologue``, ``Epilogue``,
``SPValue``).

Expressions are generated by the nested ``ExprCodeGen`` visitor, which targets
the A or B register, and statements by ``StmtCodeGen``. Per-procedure setup in
``CodeGen::visitPre(Proc&)`` creates a ``Frame``, assigns stack offsets to
formals (``FormalLocations``) and locals (``LocalDeclLocations``), and emits the
prologue before the body; ``visitPost(Proc&)`` emits the epilogue.

Control flow
------------

Control flow is threaded with generated labels (``CodeBuffer::getLabel``
produces ``lab0``, ``lab1``, …) and the conditional branches ``BRZ`` (branch
if A is zero) and ``BRN`` (branch if A is negative):

* ``IfStatement`` emits the condition, a ``BRZ`` to the else/end label, the
  then-branch, a ``BR`` past the else, then the else-branch. A ``skip`` in
  either arm is recognised and that arm's code (and branch) is omitted.

* ``WhileStatement`` emits a begin label, the condition, a ``BRZ`` to the end
  label, the body, and a ``BR`` back to the begin label.

* ``ReturnStatement`` evaluates the result expression and branches to the
  current frame's exit label (set up by the prologue/epilogue). Tail calls are
  not specially handled — the code contains ``TODO`` notes acknowledging this —
  so a ``return f(...)`` is an ordinary call followed by a branch to the exit.

* Procedure and function calls go through ``genProcCall``/``genFuncCall``,
  which load actual parameters into the callee's frame, branch with a link
  address (``LDAP`` + ``BR``), and (for functions) read the result back. The
  details are in :doc:`memory-and-calling`.

Lowering and directive optimisation
-----------------------------------

After ``CodeGen``, ``LowerDirectives`` replaces every placeholder directive
with concrete instructions now that frame sizes are known: ``SP_VALUE`` becomes
the initial stack-pointer word followed by the data section, ``PROLOGUE`` and
``EPILOGUE`` expand to the stack-pointer adjustment and return sequence, and the
``*_FB`` accesses are converted to plain ``LDAI``/``LDBI``/``STAI`` with the
offset recomputed from the final frame size.

Finally ``OptimiseDirectives`` runs a small peephole pass over the lowered
stream, matching three patterns: a ``BR`` to the immediately following label
(dropped), a ``STAM x; LDAM x`` redundant reload (the load dropped), and the
array store/reload sequence ``LDBM 1; STAI x; LDAM 1; LDAI x`` (the reload
dropped). The result is handed to the assembler; see :doc:`codebuffer`.
