The RTL implementation
======================

The ``rtl/`` directory holds a SystemVerilog implementation of the Hex
processor. It is deliberately small and direct: the processor datapath is a
single combinational decode-and-execute block clocked once per instruction,
with no pipeline, no caches, and no resource virtualisation. The whole core
(:doc:`processor <core>` plus :doc:`memory and link interface
<memory-and-links>`) is a few hundred lines of synthesizable RTL, and the
single-instruction-per-cycle model maps one-to-one onto the abstract execution
cycle described in :doc:`../architecture/execution`.

The implementation comes in two flavours that share the same datapath:

* a **single-core** top, :doc:`hex.sv <core>`, which is one processor plus its
  private memory and is used for running an individual image; and
* a **multi-core network**, :doc:`network_top.sv <network>`, which wraps the
  processor in a ``core`` together with a :doc:`link interface
  <memory-and-links>` and wires ``NUM_CORES`` of them to a pair of
  :doc:`routers <network>` so that ``par`` programs with channels run on real
  hardware.

Module map
----------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - File
     - Role
   * - ``rtl/hex_pkg.sv``
     - Shared package: parameters, the ``opcode_t`` / ``opr_opcode_t`` /
       ``syscall_t`` enumerations, address and data typedefs, and the network
       flit structs. Every other module imports it.
   * - ``rtl/processor.sv``
     - The processor datapath: registers, instruction decode, the A/B
       multiplexors and ALU, memory address generation, and the channel hand-off
       to the link interface. See :doc:`core`.
   * - ``rtl/memory.sv``
     - Word-addressed memory with a read-only byte-wide instruction-fetch port
       and a read/write word data port. See :doc:`memory-and-links`.
   * - ``rtl/link_interface.sv``
     - The per-core messaging engine that realises the ``IN`` / ``OUT``
       rendezvous in hardware. See :doc:`memory-and-links`.
   * - ``rtl/core.sv``
     - A single core: ``processor`` + ``memory`` + ``link_interface``, exposing
       the syscall, route-table config, and DATA/ACK network ports. See
       :doc:`core`.
   * - ``rtl/router.sv``
     - An ``N``×``N`` address-forwarding crossbar, instantiated once for the
       DATA network and once for the ACK network. See :doc:`network`.
   * - ``rtl/network_top.sv``
     - The multi-core top: ``NUM_CORES`` cores plus the DATA and ACK routers.
       See :doc:`network`.
   * - ``rtl/hex.sv``
     - The single-core top: one ``processor`` + ``memory``, with channel ports
       tied off. See :doc:`core`.
   * - ``rtl/processor.v``
     - A plain-Verilog (Verilog-2005) variant of ``processor.sv``, generated by
       ``sv2v``. See below.

Module hierarchy
----------------

The two tops instantiate the shared leaf modules as follows::

  hex                       (single-core top)
   |- processor
   |- memory

  network_top               (multi-core top)
   |- core  (x NUM_CORES, generate loop g_core[k].u_core)
   |   |- processor
   |   |- memory
   |   `- link_interface
   |- router  u_dnet        (DATA network)
   `- router  u_anet        (ACK network)

In the single-core ``hex`` top the processor's channel ports are left
unconnected and ``i_liu_busy`` is tied low, so a ``IN`` / ``OUT`` instruction
never stalls — that top is for sequential images only. The multi-core
``network_top`` instead gives each processor a real ``link_interface`` and
connects every core to both routers; this is the configuration the
:doc:`testbench <testbench>` drives.

The plain-Verilog variant
--------------------------

``rtl/processor.v`` is a Verilog-2005 translation of ``processor.sv`` produced
by ``sv2v`` (note the ``// Generated using sv2v`` header). It exists so that the
processor datapath can be fed to tools that do not accept SystemVerilog (older
synthesis flows, for example). It is a derivative of ``processor.sv`` and is not
the authoritative source: the SystemVerilog files are. The translation flattens
the package parameters into local constants and lowers the packed
``instr_t`` struct into explicit bit-slices of an 8-bit ``instr`` wire, but the
behaviour is identical to ``processor.sv``.

Reading order
-------------

The remaining hardware pages follow the datapath outwards:

* :doc:`core` — the processor and its decode/execute cycle.
* :doc:`memory-and-links` — the memory model and the per-core link interface.
* :doc:`network` — the router and the multi-core network.
* :doc:`testbench` — the Verilator testbench and the RTL unit tests.
